Create a new asset book page for asset processing. (#2442)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/learn/book/assets/processing.md

+++
title = "Asset Processing"
insert_anchor_links = "right"
[extra]
weight = 4
+++

So far, we've conceptualized assets as just "stuff on disk you want to put in memory". In practice
though there are two "states" of assets: the "raw" files you acquire during development (from

> the internet, from your artists, etc), and the "processed", game-ready assets. For some assets,

Reviewer: Is there any additional context that can be provided for the "processed" assets? Or maybe a better way to differentiate the "raw" versus "processed" assets? An example or real world use case could be handy, but even just something that explains the actual difference between what a "raw" file is versus a "processed" asset.

Author: I give an example two paragraphs down. I moved it up so it's right after the initial paragraph though. I also clarified which one was the "raw" file.

these are the same thing - you just ship whatever asset files you get. However, some assets need to
be converted into a form that is more appropriate for use in a game.

> This is what asset processing was created to do. When enabled, assets in your `assets` folder are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can enable **asset processing** to perform this conversion. When enabled, assets in your `assets` folder are
```

Author: Done.

automatically processed by the registered processors to produce the game-ready versions of assets.
Your game will automatically use the processed assets (without needing to change anything else).

As an example, using an ultra-high resolution texture in your game is (probably) not what you want.
This increases download sizes, slows down loading speeds, and likely reduces rendering performance.
Usually, these high-quality versions are compressed, downscaled, etc, before being used in a game.
This final form is our game-ready version.

[% callout(type="important") %]

While it is possible to enable asset processing just before publishing to do steps like compression,
we **strongly** recommend users choose at the beginning of their project whether to use processing
or not. In general, processing is **not** guaranteed to be transparent. For example, the "game-ready

> version" of a `.gltf` file could actually be a `Scene` asset, which is not the same as the `Gltf`

Reviewer: Is there a way for devs to manually handle how their assets are processed or is it strictly handled by Bevy?

Author: I don't think that's important to mention here. We get to it later on with writing your own processors.

Unless I'm misunderstanding what you mean by "manually handle".

Reviewer: I do believe my question is actually answered later on, but my initial understanding of this callout was that a developer cannot guarantee that (for example) a `.gltf` file will automatically resolve to a `Scene` asset. I think I was mostly confused by bringing up the `Gltf` asset, as my mind read it as "your asset could wind up as either a `Gltf` or `Scene` asset", but after re-reading it (and knowing the bit later on in the page) I think I know what you're saying here.

asset - these have entirely different structures! There is no guarantee (intentionally) that the
processed asset has the same type as the original asset. Another way to think of asset processing is
as an **import process**: importing a file could import it as another type entirely.

{% end %}

> To enable asset processing, first set the `AssetPlugin::mode`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step of enabling asset processing is to set the `AssetPlugin::mode` setting:
```

Author: Done (except instead of setting I said accordingly, setting felt redundant).

```rust
fn main() {
    App::new()
        .add_plugins(DefaultPlugins.set(AssetPlugin {
            mode: AssetMode::Processed,
            ..Default::default()
        }))
        .run();
}
```

This tells Bevy to use the processed versions of assets. To process assets during development, set
the `asset_processor` feature on `bevy`/`bevy_asset` (this should be **unset** when publishing your
game).

Now all that's left to do is to add processors to start processing assets. For example, enabling the
`compressed_image_saver` feature will automatically add an asset processor for `.png` files to
compress and write them (internally) as the `.basisu` file format.

{% callout(type="warning") %}

> By default, processed assets are written to `imported_assets/` (as opposed to the "regular" assets

Reviewer: Should this be a separate section rather than a callout? The information feels very key, especially since it touches topics like version control and publishing.

Author: In the future I do want a section on publishing, and we will reiterate that there. But I think this is important here since publishing is usually the last step for a user, so they may not see it until then.

directory of `assets/`). **Do not** check in the processed assets as to your version control. The
`imported_assets/` directory *should be totally ephemeral*. You should be able to delete it and Bevy
will automatically reprocess the assets. In other words, the "source of truth" for your assets
during development are those in the `assets/` directory.

In contrast, when publishing, you should be publishing your `imported_assets/` directory, not the
`assets/` directory. `imported_assets/` contains the game-ready assets which is what your published
game should use!

{% end %}

> ## Writing your own processors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Writing Your Own Asset Processor
```

Author: Done.

Bevy provides some common processors, but there are plenty of game-specific (or even asset-specific)

> processors that may be needed by users. If you need a processor, you can make one!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processors that may be needed by users. If you need a processor that Bevy doesn't provide, you can make one!
```

Author: Done.

The fundamental trait is the [`Process`] trait. Essentially it takes a `&mut dyn Reader` and writes
the processed asset to a `&mut dyn Writer`. This is the most flexible (if cumbersome) version of
this interface. This enables implementations to optimize for all sorts of use cases (for example,

> processing small chunks of the reader to avoid needing to load the entire file into memory).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`Process`] trait is the core of an asset processor. 
`Process` requires providing a `&mut dyn Reader` to read an asset file. 
The processed asset will then be written to a `&mut dyn Writer`.
This is the most flexible (if cumbersome) version of
this interface.
Implementing `Process` can allow you to optimize for all sorts of use cases (for example,
processing small chunks of the reader to avoid needing to load the entire file into memory).
```

Author: I took inspiration from this, but I didn't like some of the details.

> `Process` requires providing a `&mut dyn Reader`

The user doesn't need to provide this in any way! The user's processor is **given** this by **Bevy**. Nevertheless I think I incorporated your intent some?

type MyProcessor = LoadTransformAndSave<MyLoader, MyTransformer, MySaver>;
// It's up to you to create the transformer and saver. In this case, we assume they both have a
// `new` function. The loader must be separately registered (see below).
app.register_asset_processor(MyProcessor::new(MyTransformer::new(), MySaver::new()));
```

At this point, the processor can be used through meta files (see more below). However, most
processors are just meant to be applied to all assets with a certain extension. This can be done
quite easily:

```rust
// That type alias came in handy! We can reuse it here to set which extension it should process.
app.set_default_processor::<MyProcessor>("my_file_extension");
// We can also register more extensions to process.
app.set_default_processor::<MyProcessor>("smolext");
```

Now any asset like `blah.my_file_extension` or `cute.smolext` will automatically be processed by our
processor.

### AssetLoader

This is exactly the same asset loader as discussed in [`Custom Assets`](custom_assets.md). Note that
`LoadTransformAndSave` can only use your asset loader if it is registered.

### AssetTransformer

> This trait takes an [`AssetInput`] type and converts it into an [`AssetOutput`] type.

Reviewer: I think there should be a bit more explanation explicitly written out as to what exactly is happening here. Splitting up the code block below into a step-by-step process might be a good idea instead of just putting inline comments to generally explain what is happening.

Author: I don't want to be very detailed here since it's very situational. There's nothing special about what we're doing in this AssetTransformer IMO. Going step by step will just make it seem "railroad"y I think like "this is how you **must** make a transformer".

I did explain a little more though.

ensures that processed assets are loaded with a loader that can actually read the format that was
written.

```rust
#[derive(TypePath)]
struct MySaver;

impl AssetSaver for MySaver {
    type Asset = NewAssetType;
    type Settings = ();
    type Error = BevyError;
    type OutputLoader = NewAssetLoader;

    async fn save(
        &self,
        writer: &mut Writer,
        asset: SavedAsset<'_, '_, Self::Asset>,
        _settings; &Self::Settings,
        _asset_path: AssetPath<'_>,
    ) -> Result<NewAssetLoader::Settings, BevyError> {
        // Note: this is a simplified example where we assume we have no "subassets". If we did,
        // we'd likely need to "encode" those subassets in some way in our output data.
        let ron_string = ron::to_string(asset.get())?;
        writer.write_all(&ron_string).await?;
        Ok(NewAssetLoader::Settings::default())
    }
}
```

Just as with [`AssetLoader`]s, your type needs to be "encoded" somehow, whether through [`serde`] or
whatever else. It may be necessary to create a "serializable" version of your asset. This is
described in more detail in [`Custom Assets`](custom_assets.md).

> ## Meta files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Meta Files
```

Author: Done.

processor/loader, and the settings for that processor/loader. The default meta file for an asset can
be created using [`AssetProcessor::write_default_meta_file_for_path`]. For an asset at
`path/to/my/asset.ext`, the meta file is written to `path/to/my/asset.ext.meta`. Below is an example
of such a meta file:

```ron
(
    meta_format_version: "1.0",
    asset: Process(
        processor: "LoadTransformAndSave<MyLoader, MyTransformer, MySaver>",
        settings: (
            loader_settings: (),
            transformer_settings: (),
            saver_settings: (),
        ),
    ),
)
```

This meta file will process its asset with the [`LoadTransformAndSave`] processor we created in the
previous section. It will also do so with the given settings for all three of our stages. In our
example, the settings were just `()`, so we don't have anything interesting to configure here. But
we could!

As mentioned earlier, we can use **any** processor that has been registered, not just ones that have
been registered as a default processor for some file extension. This allows you to create processors
that target individual assets, rather than all assets of a particular extension.

> ### "Load" meta files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### "Loading" Meta Files
```

Author: I don't like this because it sounds like a verb "oh we're loading meta files", when I want it to be a noun "these are load meta files".

Reviewer: Fair enough, although my impression of "Load" is still as a verb though. I think its just that every time I see "load" on its own I'm expecting it to be the action and not a descriptor. Maybe something like Custom Load Files would come across better?
